## Day 10 / 11
### 5.0 Using Structs to Structure Related Data
- custom data type that lets you name and package together multiple related values that make up a meaningful group.

#### 5.1 Defining and Instantiating Structs
- Defined with the `struct` keyword
  - e.g. `struct User { name: String, email: String}`
- Instantiated the same was as defined but with values.
  - e.g. `let user1 = User {name: "Cory", email: "cory@mail.com"}`
- Values can be called with dot notation
  - e.g. `user1.email`
- If the instance is mutable we can use dot notation to change the value.
  - *note*: An entire struct must be mutable. You CANNOT make just some fields mutable.
- You can use the *field init shorthand syntax* to instantiate structs without having to restate the field name if it is the same as the variable name (like javascript)
  - e.g.
  ```rust
  let email = email@somewhere.com;
  let username = johnsandman;
  let active = true;
  let sign_in_count = 1;
  let user1 = new User {email, name, active, sign_in_count}
  ```
- *struct update syntax* is the similar to  javascript expansion
  - e.g.
  ```rust
  let user2 = User {
    email: String::from("another@example.com"),
    username: String::from("anotherusername"),
    ..user1
  }
  ```
- Tuple Structs
  - Has a struct name, but no variable names.
    - e.g. `struct Color(i32, i32, i32); let black = Color(0,0,0);`
- You can define structs that don't have any fields. These are called *unit-like structs*.
- Ownership of Struct Data
  - Structs can own data for the duration of their existence.
  - It's possible for structs to store references to data owned by something else, but it requires the use of `lifetimes`.

#### 5.2 Example Program
- You can format `println!` with `{:?}` for debug information or `{:#?}` for pretty print. Both need to add `#[derive(Debug)]` annotation to the struct. *Note*: There are a lot traits that can be used with the `derive` annotation that can add useful behavior to custom types.
- *methods* are like functions, but are defined within the scope of a struct, enum, or trait object and their first parameter is always `self` (which represents the instance of the struct the method is being called on).
  - We dont need to define the type in the method signature because the compiler knows the type from the context.
  - Methods can take ownership or borrow `self` mutable or immutably just like any other parameter.
  - If we wanted to write to the struct using the method we would use `&mut self`.
  - It is rare to use `self` in the method signature. It is usually only used when the methods tranforms `self ` into something new and doesn't want the caller to use the original instance.
- C and C++ use either `.` or `->` for method calling depending on if you are calling the object directly or calling it on an object pointer. Rust has a feature called *automatic referencing and dereferencing*. Rust automatically adds `&`, `&mut`, or `*` so `object` matches the signature of the method.
  - e.g. `pi.distance(&p2);` is the same as `(&p1).distance(&p2);`
- You can define functions in the `impl` block that don't take `self` as a parameter. These are called *associated functions*. These are NOT methods because you don't have an instance of the struct to work with.
  - These are often used for constructors.
  - You call these functions with `::` with the namespace of the struct (e.g. `Rectangle::`)
- You can have multiple `impl` blocks and it still be valid syntax.

### 6.0 Enums and Pattern Matching
- A type where you *enumerate* it's possible variants.
- One of the most useful enums is `Option` which says if values are something or nothing.
- `match` expressions make it easy to run different code for different enum values.
- The `if let` is a concise idiom that lets you handle enums in your code.
- These enums are most similar to *algebraic data types* in functional languages.

#### 6.1 Defining an Enum
- Defined using `enum <name> {}`
  - e.g. 
  ```rust
  enum IpAddrKind {
    V4,
    V6,
  }
  ```
- Creating instances uses `::` syntax
  - e.g. `let four = IpAddrKind::V4`
- Enums are namespaced so it allows us to write general functions.
  - e.g. `fn route(ip_kind: IpAddrKind) {}`
- Enums can also contain a tuple type
  - e.g. `V4(String)` or `V4(u8, u8, u8, u8)`
- Enums can have different types of values for each type.
  - e.g.
  ```rust
  enum IpAddr {
    V4(u8, u8, u8, u8),
    V6(String),
  }
  ```
- You can use a `struct` definition as a value type for an enum
  e.g.
  ```rust
  struct Ipv4Addr {
    // --snip--
  }

  struct Ipv6Addr {
    // --snip--
  }

  enum IpAddr {
    V4(Ipv4Addr),
    V6(Ipv6Addr),
  }
  ```
- You can define methods on enums with the `impl` keyword
  - e.g.
  ```rust
  enum Message {
    Quit,
    Move { x: i32, y: i32 },
    Write(String),
    ChangeColor(i32, i32, i32),
  }
  impl Message {
    fn call(&self) {
      // method body would be defined here
    }
  } 
  ```
- The Option Enum (instead of null)
  - The compiler can check if all cases are handled preventing common bugs in other languages.
  - Defined as:
    ```rust
    enum Option<T> {
      Some(T),
      None,
    }
    ```
  - It is included in the prelude.
  - The compiler insures that `Option<T>` gets converted to `T` before using the value. This basically automates checks for `None` (null checks in other languages)
  - Everywhere that has a value that is NOT `Option<T>` can be assumed to be a non null.
  - The `match` expression is used with enums to handle each case.

#### 6.2 The match Control Flow Operator
- `match` can compare against literal values,variable names, and wildcards to name a few.
- The compiler confirms all possible cases are handled.
- You can add `{}` to a match arm to execute multiple lines.
- match arms can bind to the parts of the values that match the pattern (used to extract values out of enum variants)
- Patterns in Rust are *exhaustive*; all cases must be covered.
- `_` is the *default* or *catch all* case.
- `()` is the unit value to return so nothing happens.
  - e.g. `_ => ()`

#### 6.3 Concise Control Flow with `if let`
- `if let` is a way to match one pattern while ignoring the rest.
  e.g.
  ```rust
  let some_u8_value = Some(0u8);
  if let Some(3) = some_u8_value {
    println!("three");
  }
  ```
  is the same as
  ```rust
  let some_u8_value = Some(0u8);
  match some_u8_value {
    Some(3) => println!("three"),
    _ => (),
  }
  ```
- Using `if let` over `match` is a trade of conciseness for exhaustiveness.
- You can also use an `else` statement after an `if let`.